Wow, first off, a huge congrats. You're about to start the final
project of the course. Amazing job making it all the way here. I hope you've been having as much
fun as I have on this journey. We're going to be working on our final
project using Jupyter notebooks. You might be starting to feel
pretty confident using them. But remember if you have any
issues you can always ask for help in the discussion forums. Okay, before we dive in, we're going to
chat a little bit about what you'll be doing for the project,
it's going to be really fun. The goal of the project is
to create a word cloud. A word cloud is an image that's
made up of different sized words. Usually the sizes of the words
are determined by how many times each word appears in a specific text. To create the image itself, we're going to use an external Python
module called creatively Word cloud. [LAUGH] Your job is to create a script
that would go through the text and count how many times each word appears. We've done this a few times already,
any ideas how we should tackle this one? If you're thinking of using a dictionary
to count how many times each word appears, then. Ding ding ding, good answer! You're going to prepare a dictionary and
use that as a parameter for the word cloud module,
not too tricky, right? I think you can handle a little more,
so two things you have to watch out for. One, punctuation marks, before
counting the frequency of the words, you need to make sure that there
are no punctuation marks in the text. If you don't, a string example
with a comma at the end would be different from a string
example with a dot at the end. So before you put words
into the dictionary, you have to clean up the text
to remove any punctuation marks. And the second thing we want to
keep our word cloud interesting. Certain words in our
language crop up a lot and if we include all of these we're going
to get a pretty dull word cloud. Think about words like, the, two or if. They usually appear
a whole lot in text but aren't too relevant to
the text's overall message. We want our Cloud to show words that
are relevant to the text we're using for the input. So you need to find a way
to exclude irrelevant or uninteresting words when
processing the text. For the input,
you're going to upload a text file. You can choose any text file you like for
your input. It could be the contents of a website,
a full novel or even everything that one
author has ever written. You just need to make sure
that it's one text file, so that it can be processed by the code. Okay, before jumping into the project, remember you can re-watch this
video If something isn't clear. Yep, I'm starting to sound
like a broken record, but this time it's extra extra important. This final project is the real test of how
much you've gotten your head around and can highlight areas you
need to brush up on. So we want you to be super clear on
what you need to do on that point. You'll find an overview of what you
have to do in the next reading. Can you guess the best way
of tackling this problem? Yep, you got it, our step-by-step
approach that we outlined earlier. Understand the problem statement,
research available options, plan your approach,
write your code and finally execute. Okay, feeling good? Ready to go? Remember, you know this stuff and
you've totally got it.