So far we have just interpreted
the estimate regression coefficients. However, remember that our data set
is just a sample of the population. So, the regression coefficients that
we get from the analyses on our sample are only estimates of the true
population parameters. That's why they're called
parameter estimates. For example if we were to draw another
sample from our population, and test the same regression
model on the new sample, the parameter estimates are not likely to
be the same as they were with our original sample, this is due to
sampling variability, meaning that the sample we draw is not
likely to be exactly like the population. To get a better understanding
of hour our sample estimates represent the population values,
we can look at confidence intervals. Confident intervals tell us which values
of the parameter estimates are plausible in the population. Typically, we look at 95%
confidence intervals which tell us with 95% certainty the range of parameter
estimate values that includes the true population parameter. That is, we are 95% certain that
the true population parameter fall somewhere between the lower and upper confidence limits that are estimated
based on a sample parameter estimate. Let's re-run the code for a multiple regression model predicting
nicotine dependent symptoms. Now, if you take a look at the output
you'll see that the results are the same. Although there's an additional
set of columns for the parameter estimates that provide
the estimated lower, and upper limits for the 95% confidence interval for
each parameter estimate. For example, if we take a look
at the parameter estimate for major dep life, we see that it is 1.3. Meaning that on average
individuals with major depression have 1.3 more nicotine dependent symptoms
than people without major depression. This is our point estimate
of the population perimeter. If we look at the conference interval
though we see that it ranges from 1.1 to 1.5. Meaning that we're 95% certain, that the true population parameter for the
association between major life depression, and number of nicotine dependant symptoms
fall somewhere between 1.1 and 1.5. That is, in the population,
there's a 95% chance that people with major life depression
have anywhere between 1.1 and 1.5 more nicotine dependent symptoms
than people without major depression. Also note that our dysthymia variable,
dyslife, had a P value of .19 which is
not statistically significant. We could not reject the null hypothesis
of no association between dysthymia, and number of nicotine dependent symptoms,
afterly adjusted for major life depression, and the other
explanatory variables in the model. If we take a look at the confidence
interval for this variable. We see that it ranges from -0.1 to 0.7,
which includes a value of 0 in that range. This means that we can't rule out with
95% confidence the possibility that the association between dysthymia, and
number of nicotine dependent symptoms, and for adjusting for
other variables in the model, is 0. In linear regression, when you have a non
significant P value, the 95% confidence interval for the parameter estimate will
include a value of 0, no association.