The first question is,
what type is the response variable? Is it Categorical or Quantitative? For our sample research question,
the response or dependent variable is Nicotine Dependence
which is Categorical. Next, we need to determine how many
categories are in this response variable. Since Nicotine Dependence is coded 1 for
yes, or present, and 0 for no, or absent, we have two
categories in the response variable. The next question to ask is,
what type is the explanatory variable? The explanatory or independent variable
is number of cigarettes smoked per month. As we saw in the demonstration
of histograms, this is a Quantitative variable. Since it won't be visually meaningful to
examine a bar chart with a quantitative explanatory variable on the Y axis, when our response variable
is actually categorical. Before we start to graph, it's important to bin our explanatory
variable into categories. That is, in order to visualize
the relationship that we're interested in, we need to add some data management that
will allow us to construct a C to C, or categorical to categorical, Bar Chart. >> Because, by default, the Pandus library
often displays an abbreviated list of rows and columns from our data frame. And I know the number of values for
numsigmo_est is fairly long, I'm going to add additional set option
statements following the library import syntax that requests a display of
the maximum number of rows and columns. The default in Python, you may have
noticed, limits this display to a subset of the data frame, and so
including display, max, columns, or rows, none, removes that limit and allows
all rows and columns to be displayed. Now, after viewing the output,
we can use the various cut functions from Python's pandas library to group
individuals in various ways. For example into quartiles,
roughly four equal groups in size. However, in this case it
seems a better decision might be to create more meaningful smoking
groups based on specific quantities. Cigarette packs contain
20 cigarettes each. We're going to create a new variable
that estimates the number of packs that each individual smokes per month,
rather than the number of cigarettes. This could be a step closer to
a categorical variable that's meaningful. The new variable is packs per month and it is set equal to the number of
cigarettes smoked per month divided by 20. Then, I add this new variable,
packs per month, to a buy group output statement so we can
view this new frequency distribution. Packs per month is still
a quantitative variable, but now we can more easily create groups based
on number of packs smoked in a month. After examining
the frequency distribution, I decide to create groupings
that include those who've smoked less than 1- 5 packs per month,
6- 10 packs per month, 11- 20, 21- 30 and
then 30+ packs per month. To accomplish this,
I add the following syntax to my program. When we add this new variable pack
category to a describe statement and then run the program, we can examine
some basic descriptive statistics. But don't forget to let Python know
that the new variable packcategory, should be treated as categorical. We can also examine the frequency
distribution for this new packcategory variable, representing
packs of cigarettes smoked per month. Here we see the number of young
adult smokers in each group. Back to our graphing decisions flow chart. Now that we've collapsed our Explanatory
Quantitative variable, smoking, into categories, we're ready to make our C
to C, or category to category bar chart. When graphing the relationship between
a categorical explanatory variable and a categorical response variable,
we use the following code. This time, we use the factorplot
function from the seaborn package. We name the categorical explanatory
variable for the x-axis, here PACKCATEGORY, and also the response
variable for the y axis TAB12MDX. And define the data frame here sub2
where the variables can be found. Kind= bar requests a bar chart. And ci=none suppresses error bars, which you will learn more about
in our statistical tools course. Again, with the xlabel function we
are able to label the x-axis, and with the ylabel function, the y-axis. Note, that for a bivariate graph, where our response variable
is categorical, we will actually need to convert this categorical
response variable back to numeric. This is because the bivariate graph
displays a mean on the y axis, which translates into the accurate proportion
of individuals with nicotine dependence. Now, how's that possible? Remember that our categorical
response variable should not have more than
two categories or levels. And those two categories
should be coded 0 and 1. 0 represents no or
negative observations, and 1 represents yes or positive observations. In this format, requesting the mean
of our categorical response variable, actually gives us the proportion
of ones or positive observations. However, as you saw from our
work with the describe function, Python will not calculate a mean once
the variable has been set to categorical. So I also need to add this syntax before
requesting a bivariate graph which transforms TAB12MDX into
a numeric variable. When I save and run this, I can examine
our categorical by categorical bar chart. Packcategory or
explanatory variable is on the x axis and this is by the rate or proportion of
nicotine dependent individuals within each pack category along the y axis. So you can see from the graph, among those
smoking one to five packs per month, about 25% of those individuals
are nicotine dependent. Among those smoking six to ten packs
a month, 50% are nicotine dependent. Among those smoking 11 to 20 packs month,
58% are nicotine dependent. Among those smoking 21 to 30 packs per
month, almost 70% are nicotine dependent. And among those smoking
more than 30 packs a month, more than 70% are nicotine dependent,
around 77%. We can also see that these
rates form a pattern. That is, the more packs smoked per month, the higher the rate of
nicotine dependence. So in a graphical way we're already seeing
that there seems to be a relationship between smoking and nicotine dependence,
as we hypothesized. >> Looking at our graphing decisions
chart, we can see the steps we've taken to generate a bivariate graph with
a Categorical response variable that has two categories and
a Quantitative Explanatory variable. We also discussed how to convert
the Quantitative Explanatory variable to a Categorical variable. A step which must be taken for the
purposes of visualizing the relationship. If our Explanatory variable was originally
Categorical rather than Quantitative, we could have skipped this step, and just moved on to a categorical
by categorical bar chart. What decisions need to be made if
the response variable has more than two categories? In this case, we would need to collapse
a Response variable categories, into two categories. To demonstrate this, we'll have
to modify the research question. So let's modify the research question
to look at the association between ethnicity and smoking stage. And we'll create a Response Variable that
categorizes young adult smokers into Three Groups, Non-daily Smokers,
Daily Smokers, and those with Nicotine Dependence. >> These are the ethnic groups recorded in
the NESARC code book along with the syntax that we can use to create
a three-category smoking stage variable. I am naming a new variable here, SMOKEGRP,
creating the temporary variable called, row, where I ask Python to
return specific values, here 1 through 3 under certain conditions. If TAB12MDX equals 1,
if USFREQMO equals 30, and a third group which includes
the rest of our young adult smokers who are neither nicotine dependent nor
daily smokers. Notice that I have used elif,
known as else if, and also else. Using if the first row
draws on the whole sample. Else if, or elif draws on what
remains of the sample after the ones, that is in those with nicotine
dependents have been assigned a 1. And else followed by a colon literally
puts everyone else in category 3 after the nicotine-dependent and daily smokers have already been
assigned values of 1 and 2. >> This sample can be described with
these three smoking categories. This bar chart shows that about
50% of the young adult sampled are Nicotine Dependent. About 30% are Daily smokers
without nicotine dependence and almost 17% are Non-daily smokers. However, to examine a relationship
between this variable as the response variable in another, we need to
collapse this to only two categories. To do this,
we need to make some decisions. Here are two perfectly reasonable
decisions that we could make. We could examine the association
between ethnicity and daily versus non-daily smokers. Or we could examine the association
between ethnicity and nicotine dependent versus
non-nicotine dependent individuals, thereby collapsing across
these categories in some way. In either case, some data management
needs to be added to the program. >> To collapse the response variable
into daily versus non-daily smokers, we can use this syntax. If USFREQMO equals 30,
that is, if the individual smokes 30 days a month, then return
a 1 for the new variable daily. Elseif, noted as elif, USFREQMO is not equal to 30, that is, not equal to smoking 30 days per month,
then return a 0 for daily. Now we can again graph the relationship between our categorical explanatory
variable ethnic group and this two-level categorical
response variable, daily smoking. Remember our categorical response variable should not have more than
two categories or levels. And those two categories should
be coded as one and zero. Zero representing no or negative and
one representing yes or positive. In this format, requesting the mean
of our categorical response variable, actually gives us the proportion
of ones or positive observations. Notice that the dummy codes for our ethnicity variable are not
ordered on the x axis and because they are dummy codes, the graph
is something difficult to interpret. You can rename categorical variable
values for graphing, first by changing the variable format to categorical
if you haven't already done so. Second, by giving
the variable ETHRACE2A new value labels with cat.rename_categorical. Here is our new graph. As you can see, the rate of daily smoking is somewhat
lower among Native American and Hispanic young adults who have smoked in the past
year compared to each of the other groups. >> Because a response variable was
Categorical with more than two categories, we needed to collapse it
into only two categories. And because our explanatory
variable ethnicity was Categorical, we created a Categorical
by Categorical Bar Chart. Had our explanatory
variable been Quantitative, we would have needed to bin or collapse
that variable into categories before creating the Categorical
by Categorical Bar Chart.