A few of the data sets that are available
include, the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health,
commonly known as Add Health. This is a nationally representative
school-based survey. Wave one of the survey included
adolescence in grades 7 through 12 in the United States. Add health includes survey data on social,
economic, psychological, and physical wellbeing of adolescents. Next is the Mars Crater Study. As you may know, the planet Mars has
terrain that is heavily cratered. These craters were created
about 4 billion years ago during a period of heavy bombardment from
asteroids, protoplanets, and comets. Made available by researchers at
the University of Colorado Boulder, this dataset includes characteristics of
more than 350,000 of these Mar's craters. Also available is a portion of the Wave 1,
National Epidemiologic Study of Alcohol and Related Conditions,
commonly known as NESARC. This is a representative sample of the US
adult population age 18 and older. And it includes data on mental health and substance use disorders that
are experienced by adults. Another data set is
the gap minder dataset. Which is made available by gapminder.org. It includes numerous
measures from 195 countries. The data had been collected
from various sources, including the World Health Organization,
the International Agency for Research on Cancer,
the United Nations and the World Bank. In order to help you learn more about
these data sets and which one you are most interested in you'll be reviewing the
available codebooks from these data sets. Sometimes called data dictionaries, codebooks commonly offer complete
information regarding the data set. That is general topics addressed, questions and/or measurements used
to record each of the variables. And in some cases,
the frequency of responses or values of each of the variables. Reviewing a codebook is always the first
step in research based on existing data. First of all, codebooks can be used
to generate research questions. Second of all, data is often useless and
completely uninterpretable without them. The code book describes how the data
are arranged in the computer file. What the various numbers and letters mean, and any special instructions
on how to use the data properly. Like any other book,
some codebooks are better than others. In the Add Health codebook each variable
has a description of what is measured. In this case it's the question
of what grade you're in. A code book will also include the various
measurement or response options. For this variable, possible response
options include 7th through 12th grade, refusal to answer the question,
a legitimate skip for those not in school, don't know and the school does
not have the grade levels, or the question is not applicable. Aside from including a listing or description of the response options for
the variable, the code book will also include corresponding values
that can be found in the data set. As we saw previously with the medical
records data set example, data sets typically include
numbers rather than words. So for
categorical variables such as grade level, each of the response options has
a corresponding numeric value. And it's that numeric value that
can be found in the data set. You can see that 7th through 12th
graders are logically coded as the numbers 7 through 12. 96 indicates that the adolescent
refused to answer. 97 indicates a legitimate skip for the adolescents who are not
currently in school. 98 indicates don't know. And 99 is recorded in a case where
the school does not have grade levels. These numeric values
are known as dummy codes, as they are included in the data set but
they carry no direct numeric meaning. Here's an excerpt from
the Mars Craters Code Book. It includes a description
of the variables for the crater's name, latitude,
longitude and diameter. Also the depth of the crater's rim as well
as the variable's name in the data set. Because most of these
are quantitative variables, rather than listing a response option the code book includes a description
of how the variable is measured. For example, latitude is measured
in decimal degrees North, longitude is measured in decimal
degrees East and both diameter and depth are measured in kilometers. From the Gapminder data set we see a
slightly different look to the code book, but very similar features. You can see that the middle column
describes each of the variables. The column on the left indicates
the variable name used in the data set. And finally the right hand
column lists the source of data. Again these are quantitative variables. The codebook includes information about
how each of these variables were measured. You can see that income per
person is measured in US dollars. Alcohol consumption is measured
in liters of pure alcohol. Armed forces is measured as the percent
of the total labor force, and breast cancer rate is measured as
new cases per 100,000 females. >> So I chose Add Health. I was really interested in health and
specifically for young adults or adolescents. >> Me, being natural sciences, I was
kind of drawn to the Mars crater study. >> I knew that I wanted to
connect it to whatever I'm doing with music and Latin American research. >> So I use the Gap Minder data set,
it's more worldly, economically, excellent for
comparing things across countries. >> My data came from Add Health. >> I think it was about 39 different code
books and each of them could have up to like 30 different questions, so we had
a lot of data we could look through. But it was organized into topics. So I looked at the code book that
discussed parental relationships, of the code book that discussed
sibling relationships. >> They were describing
these craters with like such funny descriptions that I
would never have thought of. And so that kinda drew me in. Like I was wondering why scientists
were naming these things. >> Each student can look at the same data
set, but come up with a different research question and they could choose to
analyze it in a different way and where they take that is
completely their own.