Now you have a general feel for
data sets, variable types and code books. The next step is to select one
of the data sets: Add Health, Mars Craters, NESARC, Gapminder,
or another one that you've chosen out of the data sets that have been
made available to you for the course. Select a data set that includes
variables in an area that interests you. >> Once you have selected the data sets,
identify a specific topic of interest, and print those pages of the code
book that include the variable or variables that measure
your selected topic. Note that many code books, including
those of NESARC and ADHEALTH, are too large to print, so it is very important to
create your own personal code book with only those pages that include the
variables that you would like to examine. >> Our example comes from
the NESARC data set, and our chosen topic is nicotine dependence. There are several variables related to
Nicotine Dependence, and we can see 2 here: life-time nicotine dependence and
nicotine dependence in the past 12 months. A value of zero to these variables
indicates no Nicotine Dependence, and a value of 1 indicates
the presence of Nicotine Dependence. The name of these variables
are TAB12MDX and TABLIFEDX. We'll use these variable names when
we begin to work with the data. >> We're not suggesting this topic
is more or less interesting, or more or less important than any other. What's important is that you pick
a topic that is of interest to you. We've chosen to look at
nicotine dependence. >> Once you have a topic and
have printed the code book pages that measure that topic,
it's time to build a research question. One of the simplest research
questions that can be asked is whether two topics
are associated with one another. For example, is medical treatment
seeking associated with income? Is crater depth associated
with crater diameter? Is water fluorination associated with
number of cavities during dentist visits? These data sets are vast, so there are
many potential associations to explore. Let's look at our chosen
example: nicotine dependence. >> First I need to determine what
it is about nicotine dependence that interests me. It strikes me that friends and acquaintances that I've
known throughout the years, that became hooked on cigarettes did so
across very different periods of time. Some seemed to be dependent
on smoking heavily soon after their first experience
with a cigarette, and others after many years of generally
irregular smoking behavior. >> We decide that we are most interested
in exploring the association between smoking behavior and nicotine dependence. We believe that they
are positively associated. That is to say,
the more an individual smokes, the more likely they are to
be nicotine-dependent. We're also wondering how much a person
needs to smoke in order to be nicotine dependent. >> We continue to read through
the NESARC code book, and find that smoking behavior has
also been measured in this sample. So, next, I take a step similar to one that I just
took when choosing nicotine dependence. That is, identify the variables
that measure the second topic, smoking behavior, in my data set. The variables I choose include cigarette
smoking status, usual frequency, and usual quantity. >> During your second
review of the code book for the data set that you have selected, you
should also identify a second topic that you'd like to explore in terms of it's
association with your original topic. And, again, print those pages of the code
book that include the variable, or variables, that measure
the second selected topic. [MUSIC] >> The research question find
was kind of hard for me. But I found it, and it was a lot of trial and error and a lot
of searching for all these code books. >> I chose to look at the association
between adolescent self esteem and level of parental involvement,
to see if there is a correlation there. >> So from my product, I looked
specifically at Intermediate Creators, Layered Adjusted Morphology
which is basically like, if you were to stomp on a pedal or like
step on a pedal, you would create a splash that would just like come out like this,
and that is what you call an ejecta. >> So the question that I got invested in
was the relationship between parenting or parental styles and
further adult relationships. >> I looked at binge
drinking young adults and treatment seeking patterns
based on arrests. >> Some questions almost have
never been really asked, at least not in a statistical manner. >> We're encouraged to
do original research, so actually we're not even supposed
to do what other people have done. Supposed to look at information
that we're interested in, find out where research has stopped and
asked the next question. [MUSIC]