But what happens if we control for
major depression? As you can see, both social phobia and
major depression are independently associated with the likelihood
of having nicotine dependence. Given that both social phobia and major
depression are positively associated with a likelihood of being nicotine dependent. In our predictor or
splinter variables are both binary, we can interpret the odds
ratio in the following way. Young adult daily smokers,
the sample population with social phobia are 2.3 times more likely to have
nicotine dependence than young adult daily smokers without social phobia
after controlling for major depression. Also, daily smokers with major
depression are 3.7 times more likely to have nicotine dependence
than daily smokers without depression, after controlling for
the presence of social phobia. Because the confidence intervals
on our odds ratios overlap, we can not say that major depression is
more strongly associated with nicotine dependence than the social phobia. For the population of
young adult daily smokers, we can say that those with social phobia
are anywhere between 1.2 to 4.6 times more likely to have nicotine dependence
than those without social phobia. And those with major depression are
between 2.7 and 5.0 times more likely to have nicotine dependence than
those without major depression. Both of these estimates
are calculated after accounting for the alternate disorder. As with multiple regression,
when using logistic regression, we can continue to add variables to our
model in order to evaluate multiple predictors of our binary
categorical response variable. Presence or
absence of nicotine dependence symptoms. Another example of confounding occurs when
a logistic progression model is run to test the association between panic
disorder as the explanatory variable and nicotine dependence,
the response variable. Panic disorder is an anxiety disorder
characterized by recurring panic attacks. Here we see a significant association, and
note that young adult daily smokers with panic disorder in our sample
are 2.1 times more likely to have nicotine dependence than young adult
daily smokers without panic disorder. However, when we add major
depression to the model, panic disorder is no longer significantly
associated with nicotine dependence. Here we have an example of confounding. We would say that major depression
confounds the relationship between panic disorder and nicotine dependence
because the P-Value for panic disorder is no longer significant when major
depression is included in the model. Further, because panic disorder is
no longer associated with nicotine dependence, we would not interpret
the corresponding odds ratio, but would interpret the significant odds
ratio between major depression and nicotine dependence. That is, young adult smokers with major
depression are 3.6 times more likely to have nicotine dependence than young
adult smokers without major depression after controlling for panic disorder. >> By now you should be feeling
a little more comfortable with the idea of generating a regression model
when your outcome variable is binary. Remember to always code
your outcome variable so 0 means no outcome, and
a 1 means that an outcome occurred. This is true whether your outcome is
positive, such as graduating from college, or negative,
such as developing nicotine dependence.